+++
title = "CIS 642 Syllabus"
pre = "7. "
weight = 70
date = 2018-08-24T10:53:26-05:00
+++

{{% notice noiframe %}}
This textbook was authored for the **CIS 642/643 - Software Engineering Project I&II** course at Kansas State University.  This front matter is specific to that course.  If you are not enrolled in the course, please disregard this section.
{{% /notice %}}


## CIS 642 - Software Engineering Project I (Fall 2023)

### Instructor Contact Information
* **Class Times & Location**: MWF 9:30am-11:20am DUF 1092
* **Instructor:** Nathan Bean (nhbean AT ksu DOT edu)
* **Office:** DUE 2216
* **Phone:** (785)483-9264 (Call/Text)
* **Website:** [https://nathanhbean.com](https://nathanhbean.com)
* **Office Hours:** M 2:00-3:30
* **Virtual Office Hours:** By appointment via [Zoom](https://ksu.zoom.us) or MS Teams.  Schedule a meeting via email or MS Teams Direct Message.
* **Teaching Assistant**: Eric Faust (efaust AT ksu DOT edu)
* **Office Hours:** 

### Preferred Methods of Communication:
* **Chat:** Quick questions via MS Teams are the preferred means of communication.   Questions whose answers may benefit the class I would encourage you to post in the course Team, as this keeps a public history your classmates can review. More personal questions should be direct messaged to me.
* **Email:** For questions outside of this course, email to nhbean@ksu.edu is preferred.
* **Phone/Text:** 785-483-9264 _Emergencies only!_ I will do my best to respond as quickly as I can.

### Prerequisites
* CIS 308
* CIS 501

_Students may enroll in CIS courses only if they have earned a grade of C or better for each prerequisite to these courses._

### Course Overview
The first semester of a two-semester capstone course. Current practices of software development, requirements, design, prototyping, measures and evaluation. Specification, design, and prototyping of a software system.

## Course Description

You will be creating professional-grade software to tackle a real-world application that will be released as an open-source project to the public. This includes: 
* Starting from an existing code base. Very rarely will you have the luxury of starting a real-world project from scratch.  Almost always, you’ll have to start from an existing program, framework, or API specification, and adapt it to your customers’ needs.  Existing code bases are often poorly or incorrectly documented, under- or completely non-tested, and full of spaghetti code.
* Working as a team.  You will very likely never work on a solo project in industry - modern software engineering involves teams of tens if not hundreds of programmers, plus many non-technical contributors as well.  Good software development therefore involves tools and strategies to minimize code collisions and endure productive and healthy working relationships.
* Working directly with customers to understand what the software needs to do and how it can be most useful to them.  This includes usability design and testing, feature negotiation, and human relations.
* Documenting the software as you develop it in a way that supports future maintenance and feature additions.
* Creating test frameworks or applying validation frameworks to ensure your code does exactly what it is intended to do without any errors.
* Refactoring spaghetti code and poor designs for greater efficiency and maintainability.
* Using prototypes to explore new feature ideas for usability and functionality.
* Employing a staged design, testing, and deployment process to ensure that only the highest-quality, functional, and well-tested code ever appears in front of regular users.

This bulleted list captures the course objectives - by the completion of the course you will need to have demonstrated mastery of each point through developing your software engineering project to earn an A.

## Major Course Topics
* Software Engineering
* Requirements Gathering
* Feature Estimating
* Testing and Verification
* Continuous Deployment
* Waterfall Development Model
* Agile Development Models 

## Course Structure
This course is primarily a project course – you will be grouped into teams by the instructor and assigned a specific, real-world software application to develop. Each project also comes with real-world customers who will provide guidance and design priorities, judge usability, negotiate development schedules, and determine how well your software meets their needs. Your projects will be released as open-source projects and hosted on a public Github repository. You should realize that this project will be one of the criteria by which your future employers will judge your suitability, as well as the recommendations of both your instructor and customers. 

### Lectures, Readings, Class Discussions, and Activities
While the core focus of this course is _learning by doing_, carrying out the principles of good software engineering while creating or expanding upon an open-source software project to meet society's needs, understanding the process begins with studying engineering practices. This will be done through video lectures, assigned readings, class discussions, and other class activities.  

### Software Projects
Software projects will cover a wide range of uses as well as base technologies/development languages. The instructor will endeavor to match you to a project in your interest area, but this will not always be possible. In all cases, these are real-world projects that will go on to be used by hundreds or thousands of real-world users. Good design is essential and serves to support both these eventual users and to build your reputation as a software engineer.

Software project development will proceed using an Agile methodology with a two-week iterative development cycle. At the end of each cycle, you will release a tagged prototype version of your software using Git’s tagging functionality. This prototype will be graded for: 1) code quality – focusing on readability, maintainability, and efficiency, 2) documentation – focused on accuracy and coverage, 3) testing/verification processes – focused on depth and correctness of coverage. 

You will conduct a stand-up meeting, a sprint review meeting, or a sprint planning meeting (or any combination of the above) during the assigned class period. As such, it is vital to the success of your project that you attend these meetings! 

## Development Teams
You will be assigned to a development team of 3-4 students. Each student is expected to contribute to all aspects of the development process. This means that you will not have a documentation guru or a testing guru who only writes documentation or tests. Every member should carry part of the responsibility for writing code, tests, and documentation, as well as working with customers. However, you can divide duties in such a way for a specific design iteration – but by the end of the project each member should have contributed equally in each area. 

Every two weeks you will have a formal review and planning meeting with some or all of your customers, at which point they will evaluate your iteration’s prototype for how well it meets their needs. This meeting will be scheduled during the course lab time to facilitate coordination of schedules. It is a mark of respect and professionalism to be on-time, well-prepared, and well groomed for these meetings. Missing a meeting (with the exception of emergency circumstances) will result in an automatic lowering of your grade by a full letter (1 on a 4-point scale). The customers’ evaluations, along with a survey of how well they felt the team interacted with them during the design iteration, will be the basis of your customer relation grade. This grade will be adjusted by the instructors if the team members arrive late, are ill-prepared, appear in inappropriate attire (for these meetings, you should be in business casual).

## Process Fidelity
Each team will also be responsible for making adequate usage of the many tools developed to enhance and expedite the software development process. At a minimum, the development team should be using 1) a code repository to manage the sharing of team code (Git publicly hosted through GitHub or the departmental GitLab server is required) 2) a feature planning and bug tracking system like GitHub or GitLab _issues_, and 3) a documentation wiki (Use the Github or GitLab built-in Wiki). Each of these is a tool you should be using throughout the development cycle, not simply something you throw data into right before your next meeting. You will be graded on how regularly and effectively you utilize these tools. 

In addition, Agile software development utilizes a set of artifacts – physical and visual representations of the project’s goals and progress. These help teams and managers quickly assess what needs to be done on a project and how far along the process is. Your team will also need to make appropriate and regular use of these artifacts, including: 1) velocity chart, and 2) burn-down chart. 

## Grading
This course uses a different approach to grading than you are probably used to, _criterion grading_.  In criterion grading, there is no concept of a 'partial score'; instead your work is either _acceptable_ (and you earn full points), or _unacceptable_ (and you earn no points).  This is reflective of industry practice - if you fail in your job, you _will_ get fired.  

Each activity you are tasked with is worth a certain number of points, and the guidelines for what is acceptable will be spelled out _in the assignment description_, so read them carefully!

In addition, exceptional work may be rewarded with a bonus of 5% of the points set for the assignment.

{{% notice info %}}
For each sprint, your project needs to: 
1. Implement the features you agreed to in your sprint planning meeting
2. Thoroughly document those features
3. Thoroughly test or verify those features
You should keep this in mind when you negotiate with your customers as to what features you will add to your prototype.  In effect, you are _negotiating the requirements for an acceptable grade_!
{{% /notice %}}

Grades will be issued on a 4-point scale, with 4=A and 0=F. Grades will be issued for each category according to this breakdown:

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Grade Category</th>
    <th>Consists Of</th>
    <th>% Final Grade</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Class Participation</td>
    <td>Lectures, Class Discussions, Class Activities</td>
    <td>20%</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Software Projects</td>
    <td>Code Reviews, Documentation, Testing, Functionality</td>
    <td>20%</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Development Teams</td>
    <td>Peer Reviews, Meeting Attendance, Project Contributions </td>
    <td>20%</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Customer Relations</td>
    <td>Usability of Application, Quality of Interactions, Professionalism</td>
    <td>20%</td>
  </td>
  <tr>
    <td>Process Fidelity</td>
    <td>Regularity of tools, creation and usage, of appropriate charts and metrics</td>
    <td>20%</td>
  </tr>
</table>

Each category is equally important for your preparation for becoming a software engineer - remember, it isn’t only about writing good code, it’s about making that code useful to society!

## Late Work
Late work is considered _unacceptable_, and as such will result in no points earned on the assignment.  As Seniors you should have developed sufficient time management and planning skills to keep on top of your due dates.

For your sprints, remember that in your sprint planning, you are setting your commitments by what you add to your sprint backlog - don't overcommit!  At the same time, you need to be making enough progress to keep your customer happy _while ensuring_ your software is of sufficient quality and adequately documented and tested.

## Dress Policy
As indicated in the customer relations section, students are expected to wear at a minimum business professional attire for the bi-weekly review and planning meetings with their customers. For other meetings with customers. Career and Employment Services publishes guides to professional and casual attire for men and women on their site <a href="https://www.k-state.edu/careercenter/students/apply_interview/attire/dresstoimpress.html">(https://www.k-state.edu/careercenter/students/apply_interview/attire/dresstoimpress.html)</a>. These will be used as the grading rubric within this area, so be sure to familiarize yourself with the expectations! 

For obtaining inexpensive business wear options, there are many opportunities
available to you:
* CES offers the career closet every Monday-Friday, 8am - 5pm at the Berney Family Welcome center to find gently-used professional wear.  Students can typically take up to three articles. Monetary donations will go to the Manhattan Emergency Shelter.
* Several thrift stores in Manhattan carry business professional and casual attire at affordable prices (listed by proximity to campus):
  * Goodwill, 421 E. Poyntz Avenue
  * Grand Old Trunk, 1304 Pillsbury Drive

## Subject to Change
The details in this document are not set in stone – there may need to be adjustments made throughout the semester. If this occurs, changes will be posted to the K-State online page and emailed to student’s K-State email addresses. 

{{< syllabus exclude="copyright">}}

## Copyright Notice
©2021 The materials in this online course fall under the protection of all intellectual property, copyright and trademark laws of the U.S. The digital materials included here come with the legal permissions and releases of the copyright holders. These course materials should be used for educational purposes only; the contents should not be distributed electronically or otherwise beyond the confines of this online course. The URLs listed here do not suggest endorsement of either the site owners or the contents found at the sites. Likewise, mentioned brands (products and services) do not suggest endorsement. Students own copyright to what they create.

Original content in the course textbook at [{{% ref "/"  %}}]({{% ref "/"  %}}) is licensed under a Creative Commons BY-SA license by Nathan Bean unless otherwise stated.